In the first three posts of this series, we have seen several ways to overcome the data problem in machine learning: first we posed the problem, then discussed one-shot and zero shot learning, and in the third post presented the reinforcement learning way of using no data at all. In this final installment, we discuss the third direction that modern machine learning takes to help with the lack of labeled data: how can we use unlabeled data to help inform machine learning models?
Why Can Unlabeled Data Be Useful?
For many problems, obtaining labeled data is expensive but unlabeled data, especially data that is not directly related to the problem, is plentiful. Consider the computer vision problems we talked about above: it’s very expensive to get a large dataset of labeled images of faces, but it’s much less expensive to get a large dataset of unlabeled such images, and it’s almost trivial to just get a lot of images with and without faces.
But can they help? Basic intuition tells that it may not be easy but should be possible. After all, we humans learn from all sorts of random images and get an intuition about the world around us that generalizes exceedingly well. Armed with this intuition, we can do one-shot and zero-shot learning with no problem. And the images were never actually labeled, our learning can hardly be called supervised.
In machine learning, the intuition is similar. Suppose you want to teach a model to tell cats and dogs apart on one-megapixel photos. Mathematically speaking, each photo is a vector of about 3 million real values (RGB values for every pixel; they are in fact discretized but we will forgo this part), and our problem is to construct a decision surface in the space R3,000,000 (sounds formidable, right?). Obviously, random points in this space will look like white noise on the image; “real photos”, i.e., photos that we can recognize as something from the world around us, form a very low-dimensional, at least compared to 3 million, manifold in this space (I am using the word “manifold” informally, but it probably really is an open subset: if you take a realistic photo and change one pixel or change every pixel by a very small value, the photo will remain realistic). Something like the picture we already saw in the first installment of this series: